---
layout: post
title: Polanyi and His Critique of Market Liberalism
---

Karl Polanyi, in *The Great Transformation*, sets up an argument against market liberalism--that is, the belief that markets should be free of influence by governments and left to operate on their own, regulating and correcting themselves naturally--by using history as his aide. In chapter three, titled "Habitation versus Improvement," he explains that in society exist two competing forces, the drive for improvement on the part of the "gentleman"--or a free market capitalist--versus the drive for habitation on the part of the common person. In chapter four, titled "Societies and Economic Systems," Polanyi seeks to challenge the predominant leader of free market philosophy, Adam Smith, on his assumption that man has a natural "propensity to barter, truck and exchange one thing for another" (45). These two chapters, together with the rest of the book, add up to a complete assault on the idea of a self-regulating market economy.

In chapter three, Polanyi argues that change, even if it is good, when brought too suddenly and too strongly can result in catastrophic consequences. He directly states that "the essence of purely economic progress [...] is to achieve improvement at the price of social dislocation" (36). Since there are two opposing forces at all times, the demands of the common people for a good living in an economy and the demands of the free market to improve society--often at the cost of the well-being of various strata in society in the short-term--delicate care must be taken by governments to keep things in check such that society moves forward. Polanyi believes that without government intervention one of these two forces would ruin society.

To prove that his thoughts on change are not just ideas, Polanyi references historical precedent to show that government intervention is not only necessary in a market economy, but has been demonstrated to work in the past. He uses an example involving the Tudor and Stuart governments interfering with the push for enclosures on the part of merchants to get his point across.

In chapter four, Polanyi takes on the whole of academia, specifically Adam Smith, with his argument that, while it is certainly within human nature to create economies based on exchange, "*gain and profit* (emphasis added) made on exchange never before played an important part in human economy" (45). The goal of this chapter is to challenge the idea that market economies are in any way natural, and to set up an argument for future chapters that, if they are in fact not natural, perhaps options exist outside of the liberal idea that a self-regulating market is always best.

Polanyi argues that the drive for personal gain in an economic system is something not found anywhere in human history except a modern market system as was first established during the Industrial Revolution. He states: "While history and ethnography know of various kinds of economies, most of them comprising the institution of markets, they know of no economy prior to our own, even approximately controlled and regulated by markets" (46). Furthermore, many *advanced* economic systems have existed prior to the modern age that had no concept of personal gain as we know it in a market-based economy.  To back up his claims, he goes on to list examples of different civilizations that had complex economies without these supposed "natural" concepts. An excerpt:
>It should by no means be inferred that socioeconomic principles of this type are restricted to primitive procedures or small communities; that a gainless and marketless economy must necessarily be simple. The Kula ring, in Western Melanesia, based on the principle of reciprocity, is one of the most elaborate trading transactions known to man; and redistribution was present on a gigantic scale in the civilization of the Pyramids. (52)

Polanyi suggests that human beings do have a natural affinity, and it is for social exchange. He argues that "man's economy, as a rule, is submerged in his social relationships" (48). In other words, an economy is subject to society, not the opposite. 

Finally, Polanyi makes an important distinction between an economy that exists out of natural economic motives as in Smith's philosophy, and one that exists as a result of the social game. Just as complexity can arise from simple things in the process of evolution, so too can "so-called economic motives spring from the context of social life" (49). His "recipe" for these seemingly economic motives is reciprocity, redistribution, symmetry, and centricity.